Set-up initial documentation tree and first "Integration" docs (#1020)
scality/metalk8s: docs/developer/solutions/introduction.rst

Introduction
============

With a focus on having minimal human actions required, both in its deployment
and operation, MetalK8s also intends to ease deployment and operation of
complex applications, named *Solutions*, on its cluster.

This document defines what a *Solution* refers to, the responsibilities of each
party in this integration, and will link to relevant documentation pages for
detailed information.

What is a *Solution*?
---------------------

We use the term *Solution* to describe a packaged Kubernetes application,
archived as an ISO disk image, containing:

- A set of OCI images to inject in MetalK8s image registry

> - An `Operator`_, to deploy on the cluster

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- An `Operator`_ to deploy on the cluster
```

- :doc:`./archive`
- :doc:`./operator`
- (TODO) Solution UI guidelines

Once a Solution is deployed on MetalK8s, a user can deploy one or more versions
of the Solution Operator, using either the Solution UI or the Kubernetes API,
into separate namespaces. Using the Operator-defined ``CustomResource(s)``, the
user can then effectively deploy the application packaged in the Solution.

How is a *Solution* declared in MetalK8s?
-----------------------------------------

MetalK8s already uses a ``BootstrapConfiguration`` object, stored in
``/etc/metalk8s/bootstrap.yaml``, to define how the cluster should be
configured from the bootstrap node, and what versions of MetalK8s are available
to the cluster.

In the same vein, we want to use a ``SolutionsConfiguration`` object, stored in
``/etc/metalk8s/solutions.yaml``, to declare which Solutions are available to
the cluster, from the bootstrap node.

.. todo:: Add specification in a future Reference guide

Here is how it could look::

    apiVersion: metalk8s.scality.com/v1alpha1
    kind: SolutionsConfiguration
    solutions:
      - /solutions/storage_1.0.0.iso
      - /solutions/storage_latest.iso

>       - /other_solutions/computing.iso

Reviewer 2: This example has the advantage of showing 2 versions of the same Solution, I was going to be ask about this case. It leaves me wondering how this case would work: is it designed for parallel run (either because 2 different versions will be needed indefinitely because of independent release tracks, or because we want to support gradual migration from version `v` to version `v+1`) or only one version active at a time that need to be selected/switched by the user through API/UI?

Author: It's designed to run multiple versions of a Solution at the same time, using Namespaces for isolation. This allows users to try a new version in some `staging` namespace first, before upgrading their `prod` namespace.

Author: I improved a few sections to be more explicit about this intent, later improvements will include UML diagrams for these use-cases.

> There would be no explicit information about what the archives contain.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There would be no explicit information about what an archive contains.
```

Since we use one archive in the line just after.

Instead, we want the archive itself to contain such information (more
details in :doc:`./archive`), and to discover it at import time.

Responsibilities of each party
------------------------------

This section intends to define the boundaries between MetalK8s and the
Solutions to integrate with, in terms of "who is doing what?".

.. note:: This is still a work in progress.

MetalK8s
^^^^^^^^

**MUST**:

- Handle reading and mounting of the Solution ISO archive
- Provide tooling to deploy/upgrade a Solution's CRDs and UI

**MAY**:

- Provide tooling to deploy/upgrade a Solution's Operator
- Provide tooling to verify signatures in a Solution ISO
- Expose management of Solutions in its own UI

Solution
^^^^^^^^

**MUST**:

- Comply with the standard archive structure defined by MetalK8s

> - Expose management of its Operator instances in its UI

Reviewer: A few sections above we state that the UI is optional for a solution, and in here we say that it MUST expose stuff in its UI.

Author: Would that be better?

```suggestion
- If providing a UI, expose management of its Operator instances
```

- Handle monitoring of its own services (both Operator and application, except
  the UI)

**MAY**:

> - Use MetalK8s monitoring services (Prometheus and Grafana)

Reviewer 2: It may be worth taking a stronger stance on this. As a potential Solution developer I understand that I can use MetalK8s monitoring services for convenience, but I am not sure if it's a good (ie sustainable) idea, or if the more sustainable path is to embed my own prometheus stack.

Author: I thought there was no strong requirement, so moved it to _MAY_, but indeed it makes sense to force the usage of the cluster-provided Prometheus stack.

Reviewer 2: I don't have a strong opinion either way, it's mostly about nudging developers in a "preferred" direction so that resources/storage capacity planning for the platform's Prometheus instance are adequate. As a Solution developer I would enjoy not having to manage my own Prom stack if I can trust that I won't have any surprises with retention duration etc :)

Author: Changed `MAY` into `SHOULD`, although I don't want to say `MUST`, since deploying your own monitoring stack should not prevent the Solution from working (though I'm not sure if having multiple Prometheus Operators watching for `ServiceMonitor`s could pose issues...). I'll open a tracking ticket.

Author: Ok, latest conversations led to a simpler stance: Solutions that want to be deployed on MetalK8s `MUST` use the provided Prometheus Operator to set-up their monitoring. However, it is reasonable to assume Solution developers may want their Operator to work in any K8s cluster, hence could manage their own monitoring stack there. I'm still unsure about how they would do so, let's focus on _using_ MetalK8s stack for now (will consider the alternative use-case in #1158).

.. note::

   Solutions can leverage the ``prometheus-operator`` CRs for setting up the
   monitoring of their components.

.. todo:: Define how Solutions can deploy Grafana dashboards.

Interaction diagrams
--------------------

We include a detailed interaction sequence diagram for describing how MetalK8s

> will handle user input when deploying / upgrading Solutions.

Reviewer 2: Would be worth mentioning rollback (even if it's exactly the same as upgrading) for operations-minded readers.

Author: We will add more in-depth guides for operational matters w.r.t Solutions, this one is for developers to understand how MetalK8s manages Solutions (which needs improvements as well, granted).

Most importantly, this diagram shows how deployment/upgrade is actually left to the user (manually or through the Solution UI). Rollback would fall into this category as well, IMHO.

Agreed though, we will need to show how a Solution gets **removed** from MetalK8s (which we won't do in the early stages, would be implemented in the generic `import_all_solutions` runner).

Author: I added a warning for removal, and mentioned more details about how an Operator is deployed manually by the user.

``/etc/metalk8s/bootstrap.yaml``, to define how the cluster should be
configured from the bootstrap node, and what versions of MetalK8s are available
to the cluster.

In the same vein, we want to use a ``SolutionsConfiguration`` object, stored in
``/etc/metalk8s/solutions.yaml``, to declare which Solutions are available to
the cluster, from the bootstrap node.

.. todo:: Add specification in a future Reference guide

Here is how it could look::

    apiVersion: metalk8s.scality.com/v1alpha1
    kind: SolutionsConfiguration
    solutions:
      - /solutions/storage_1.0.0.iso
      - /solutions/storage_latest.iso
      - /other_solutions/computing.iso

There would be no explicit information about what an archive contains.
Instead, we want the archive itself to contain such information (more
details in :doc:`./archive`), and to discover it at import time.

Note that Solutions will be **imported** based on this file contents, i.e.
the images they contain will be made available in the registry and the UI
will be deployed, however **deploying** the Operator and subsequent
application(s) is left to the user, through manual operations or the Solution
UI.

.. note::

>    Removing an archive path from the ``solutions`` list will effectively

Reviewer 3: This is not reflected in the UML diagram I believe?

Author: Indeed, I forgot to add it.
